Table of Contents
Introduction
Project Overview
Dataset
Data Preprocessing
Exploratory Data Analysis (EDA)
Model Training & Evaluation
Results
Conclusion & Future Work
How to Run the Project
1. Introduction
Customer churn refers to the loss of customers over time. This project aims to build a machine learning model that predicts customer churn, helping businesses proactively take retention measures.

2. Project Overview
🔹 Goal: Build a churn prediction model using Logistic Regression and Random Forest.
🔹 Approach:
✔ Clean and preprocess data
✔ Perform exploratory data analysis (EDA)
✔ Train machine learning models before and after balancing the dataset
✔ Evaluate models and optimize performance

3. Dataset
📌 Dataset Name: Telco Customer Churn Dataset
📌 Source: Available on Kaggle

Feature	Description
gender	Customer’s gender (Male/Female)
SeniorCitizen	Whether the customer is a senior citizen (1 = Yes, 0 = No)
tenure	Number of months the customer has stayed
MonthlyCharges	Customer’s monthly charges
TotalCharges	Total amount billed
Contract	Type of contract (Month-to-month, One year, Two years)
Churn	Target variable (Yes/No)
4. Data Preprocessing
✔ Handled Missing Values: TotalCharges converted to numeric and missing values filled.
✔ Encoded Categorical Features: Used One-Hot Encoding for categorical variables.
✔ Scaled Numerical Features: Applied StandardScaler to tenure, MonthlyCharges, and TotalCharges.
✔ Balanced Dataset Using SMOTE: Increased instances of churned customers to prevent bias.

5. Exploratory Data Analysis (EDA)
✔ Class Imbalance Check: Most customers did not churn, making the dataset imbalanced.
✔ Feature Correlation: Strong correlation found between contract type and churn.
✔ Visualization Used:

Bar plot for churn distribution
Heatmap for correlation analysis
6. Model Training & Evaluation
Models Used:
✔ Before SMOTE: Logistic Regression, Random Forest
✔ After SMOTE: Models retrained on a balanced dataset

Performance Comparison:
Model	Accuracy (Before SMOTE)	Accuracy (After SMOTE)
Logistic Regression	82%	76%
Random Forest	80%	77.5%
📌 Key Insights:

Random Forest outperformed Logistic Regression after balancing.
SMOTE improved recall, helping to detect more churned customers.
7. Results
🔹 Most Important Features Affecting Churn:
✔ Tenure – Shorter tenure leads to higher churn.
✔ Payment Method – Electronic check users churn more.
✔ Monthly Charges – Higher charges correlate with higher churn.

📌 Visualization Used: Feature importance bar chart.

8. Conclusion & Future Work
✅ Key Takeaways:

Machine learning can effectively predict churn and help businesses retain customers.
Random Forest performed best, providing higher recall for churned customers.
SMOTE helped address class imbalance, improving recall.
🚀 Next Steps:

Hyperparameter tuning to further improve accuracy.
Deploy the model using Flask/Streamlit API.
Integrate real-time predictions for businesses.
9. How to Run the Project
Step 1: Clone Repository
bash
Copy
Edit
git clone https://github.com/your-username/churn-prediction.git
cd churn-prediction
Step 2: Install Dependencies
bash
Copy
Edit
pip install -r requirements.txt
Step 3: Run the Model
python
Copy
Edit
python churn_model.py
Step 4: Run the API (If Deploying)
bash
Copy
Edit
python app.py
Step 5: Test Predictions
Send a POST request with sample data to localhost:5000/predict to get a churn prediction.

